---
title: Local Contrast
contributors:
  - Thanatomanic
  - DrSlony
---

## Introduction

The Local Contrast tool adds local contrast to an image by applying an
unsharp mask with a large blur radius. It it an easy way to give an
image a little more 'punch'. In effect, the image is blended with a
blurred version of itself, amplifying the local tones (highlights get
lighter, shadows get darker), thus creating more contrast. The contrast
can be tuned by several parameters explained below.

This tool was first implemented by [G'MIC](http://gmic.eu/) and then
ported to RawTherapee. Its effect is applied in L\*a\*b\* space and only
on the lightness channel. Its position in the [processing pipeline](http://rawpedia.rawtherapee.com/Toolchain_Pipeline) is after
the Shadows / Highlight tool and before all other tools that operate in
L\*a\*b\* space.

<div align="center">

<File:LocalContrast-Off.jpg%7COriginal> image.
<File:LocalContrast-On.jpg%7CLocal> Contrast applied (Radius = 100,
Amount = 0.5)

</div>

## Interface

### Radius

Determines the extent of the local contrast (i.e. the radius of the
blurring). Higher values give a smoother, but stronger contrast. Lower
values give a more localized, less pronounced contrast.

### Amount

Determines the overall strength of the effect. Higher values amplify the
differences between the original image and the blurred image, thereby
increasing contrast.

### Darkness/Lightness Levels

The "Darkness Level" parameter modifies only those areas of the image
that were darkened with respect to the original. Higher values amplify
the change (making darker parts even darker), lower values diminish the
change. N.B. A value of 0 means the local contrast is only modified by
making the image lighter.

The "Lightness Level" parameter works similarly, but only on areas that
were lightened.

Note that setting both the "Darkness Level" and "Lightness Level" to 0
effectively disables the tool.
